# Loki

Loki is a low-key, quick and dirty utility to build static web pages using a
simple templating format.  Loki was built with the specific needs of building
the [Lensflare](http://www.lensflare.com/) website in mind (i.e., keeping things
templated and organized, and also to manage game manuals and such in a
consistent fashion) -- to see an example of it in use, take a look at the
[source repo](https://github.com/doubt72/www.lensflare.com) for the web site.  I
did, however, make minimal efforts to keep it generally useful while I was
working on the site, so maybe it would be useful to someone whose needs were
sufficiently similar.

Think of Loki as the exact opposite of something like Sinatra: instead of a
dynamic web server, it generates a bunch of HTML pages to be uploaded to a
static web server somewhere.

## Getting Started

To get started, run the following command (you'll need to the bundler gem
installed):

```
bundle install
```

To install the gem, run the following commands (optionally replacing `*` with
the current version):

```
gem build loki.gemspec
gem install loki-*.gem
```

You can then run the loki command anywhere like this:

```
loki <source-dir> <destination-dir>
```

If you don't want to install the gem, you can alternately run loki from the loki
repository directory like so:

```
bin/loki <source-dir> <destination-dir>
```

If you'd like to run the tests, run:

```
rspec
```

There's also a pretty primitive Makefile that does all this for you (i.e., run
`make`, or run `make clean` to uninstall and remove the gem).

## Why Loki?

Why not?  It's useful for me.

I wanted something to manage a static web page that had gotten a bit unwieldy,
especially my online manuals (which were really a bit of a mess).  The blog
stuff I threw in because, well, why not. I didn't have particularly heavyweight
needs there, either, and liked the idea of having complete control over
everything.

Is it useful for you?  Who knows?  Maybe if your needs are similar enough (i.e.,
if you need to manage a static site where you write the pages locally and FTP
them up to a static server or whatever.  If you have online manuals to manage.
If you're a clone of me in a very similar parallel universe.  I don't judge).
It probably isn't the easiest software to use for whatever passes for normal
people, and it does (gasp) involve programming some pretty minimal Ruby, but
honestly you don't really need to know anything about Ruby to use it (though it
would help to debug issues with your pages.  Hopefully I've made the error
messages expressive enough -- and the software stable enough -- that you
wouldn't need that, though).  That said, it is pretty oriented towards
programmers, so your mileage may vary.

If you are a programmer, I've also made some effort to keep the code tested and
somewhat maintainable, although I know I haven't done a perfect job there, I
don't think it's too bad, either.  So screwing around with Loki itself hopefully
wouldn't be too intimidating.

Anyway, writing it was relaxing, and I needed something to unwind after I quit
one job before I really dived into the next one, so writing it had some value to
me independent of any usefulness it might or might not objectively have.

## Using Loki

Loki requires a source and destination directory, and both of these paths must
exist before running loki.  In addition, the source directory must contain the
`views`, `assets`, and `components` directories before loki will run.

The `views` directory contains the pages generated by loki.  Any files in that
directory or any of its subdirectories will be interpreted as a page.

The `assets` directory contains any other objects (images, scripts, css, any
other random files) referred to in those pages.  Any assets will be copied to
the destination directory if (and only if) referenced by a page.

The `components` directory contains any components (templates, partials) needed
to build the pages.

## Loki Pages

Loki pages have two sections: metadata and body.  The sections are separated by
two dashes (`--`) on a line by itself.  Bodies can contain any arbitrary HTML
and directives (see below) enclosed in curly braces (`{` and `}`).  For example,
a page might look like:

```
id "home"
title "my home page"
css ["css/default.css"]
--
{include("partials/header.prt")}

<h1>This is my home page</h1>

Today is {Time.now}.

{link("about", "About Me", {class: "my-link"}})}
{include("partials/footer.prt")}
```

This might end up looking something like:

```
<html>
<head>
  <title>my home page</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="assets/css/default.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body>
<div class="header">my header</div>

<h1>This is my home page</h1>

Today is 2016-03-28 00:05:56 -0600.

<a href="/about.html" class="my-link">About Me</a>
<div class="footer">my footer</div>
</body>
</html>
```

## Metadata Parameters

The following parameters are available:

* `id`: page id; must be unique. This is used to reference other pages with the
  link directive (see below).

* `title`: page title (will go in the head).

* `template`: template used for this page (if set). The template with the given
  name/path must exist in the `components` directory.

* `tags`: a list of tags

* `css`: a list of css files/paths; the files must exist in the `assets`
  directory and will be copied when referenced.

* `javascript`: a list of javascript files; the files/paths must exist in the
  `assets` directory and will be copied when referenced.

* `favicon`: a list of lists, each containing an (integer) size, a string with
  the type, and a string with the path, which must exist in the `assets`
  directory, and will be copied when referenced.

* `set`: custom metadata fields; requires two arguments: a key and a value. For
  example, if `set :foo, "bar"` is used in a page's metadata, `{page.foo}` in
  the body would insert `bar` into the page at that point.

* `global`: custom metadata fields; requires two arguments: a key and a value.
  For example, if `global :foo, "bar"` is used in a page's metadata,
  `{site.foo}` in the body would insert `bar` into the page at that point.
  Unlike with `set`, this value can be accessed in the body of any page on the
  site, not just the current page.

* `manual_data`: data for generating online manuals; see the manuals section
  below.

* `head`: takes an arbitrary string, and inserts it into the page head

Values must be inside strings (they are interpreted as ruby strings; values can
also be returned from a `do`-`end` block).  You can also put arbitrary ruby code
in the metadata.  The `site` and `page` objects can also be used to return
values that are already set via `set` or `global` (or via the config hooks
below).

## Loki Directives

Any blocks of ruby code can be inserted inside of curly brackets (`{}`) in page
bodies.  This can be used to insert files or calculate values, etc.  The
following directives are available in the interpretation scope:

* `body`: only legal in templates, will include the page body (this is required
  somewhere in the template for it to meaningfully function as a template)

* `page`: the current page object; this can be used to access values set in
  metadata.  For example `{page.id}` would insert the value of the current
  page's `id` into the body.

* `page.set(<key>, <value>)`: sets a value for the page (same as set for
  metadata). For example, if `{page.set :foo, "bar"}` is inserted somewhere in
  the page, `{page.foo}` later in the body would insert `bar` into the page at
  that point.

* `site`: same as above, only for global site values.

* `site.set(<key>, <value>)`: sets a value for the site. For example, if
  `{site.set :foo, "bar"}` is inserted somewhere in the page, `{site.foo}` later
  in the body (or in the body of any page evaluated later) would insert `bar`
  into the page at that point.  This is a lot less useful that setting a
  `global` value in the metadata, since this wouldn't be evaluated until the
  page is being built and would only be accessible from other pages being built
  after it; values set in metadata happen when the pages are loaded before any
  of the pages are built and any evaluation happens, so are available to all
  pages no matter the order of processing.  Also see config hooks below.

* `include(<partial>)`: includes another file from the components directory

* `link(<id/path>, <text>)`: inserts a link to another page or asset; pages are
  referred by id, assets by path (don't include the 'asset' directory in the
  path, that will be prepended automatically).  Text will be the text of the
  link (or HTML or whatever).  Assets must exist in the source assets directory
  and will be copied to the destination directory.

* `link_abs(<url>, <text>)`: inserts an arbitrary absolute link.  Text is same
  as above.

* `image(<path>)`: inserts an image.  Image must exist in source assets
  directory and will be copied to the destination directory.

`link`, `link_abs`, and `image` can be passed an options hash as the last
argument; an `:id` key is used for ids, `:class` for classes, and `:style` for
styles.  Passing the option `:self_class` to links will instruct them to use the
supplied class if the link points to itself. Passing the option `:append` will
append the value to the link, i.e., something like `#top` could be appended to
the end of the url to link to the id `top` inside a page.  Passing the option
`:alt` to an image will specify an alt-text for that image.  

* `table(<data>)`: inserts a table; the data argument should be a square array
  of arrays (i.e., lists of the same length for each row inside of an outer
  list).  An options hash containing `:id` or `:class` can also be supplied (a
  `:style` option would only apply to the top-level `table` tag; there are three
  different kinds of HTML tags in a table -- `table`, `tr`, and `td` -- use CSS
  to target them specifically.  If finer control is required, it's probably
  better to just create the table using HTML yourself).

* `manual_ref(<section>, <text>)`: relative link to another section of a manual
  (generally this is used inside of `manual_data`, but at minimum `manual_data`
  must be defined for the current page). This will render `<text>` with a link
  to the correct section of the manual; if `<text>` is omitted, the section name
  will be used.  See the manuals section below for more information.

* `render_manual`: generates manual HTML from manual data as defined in the
  metadata; see the manuals section below.

Using a double open curly brace (`{{`) will result in a literal curly brace (`{`)
in the destination file. Using a double close curly brace (`}}`) inside an
evaluation context will be a literal curly brace (`}`) instead of closing the
context. You can put arbitrary ruby code into the evaluation blocks, e.g.,
`{Time.now.year}` would insert the year at that point in the page.

## Config Hooks

There are two special files in the top level of the source directory that (if
they exist) will be loaded at two different points in the run.  The first is
`config.rb` which is run before loading any of the pages.  The second is
`config_load.rb` which is run after all the pages are loaded but before they're
built/evaluated.

The contents of these files can be any arbitrary ruby, but the most important
use for these files is to set global site values.  This is done with the `set`
function.  For example, if the `config.rb` contains the line `set :foo, "bar"`,
when `{site.foo}` is included in any of the pages on the site, it will insert
`bar` at that point.

The following directives are available in this interpretation scope:

* `set`: custom fields for site reference; requires two arguments: a key and a
  value. For example, if `set :foo, "bar"` is used in config.rb, `{site.foo}` in
  the body of any page would insert `bar` into the page at that point (this is
  effectively the same as the `global` directive in page metadata).

* `blog_config`: configuration for managing blog posts; see the Blog Pages
  section below.

## Automatically Generating Manuals

Loki has built-in directives for generating dynamic manuals. The way this works
is that the data (text/html) used to build the manual is defined in the page
metadata with the `manual_data` directive, and the `render_manual` directive is
used in the body to render it.

The data for the manual must be list defined as such:

```
[<manual-name>, <introduction-text>, <section>, <section>...]
```

Where each section in the list of sections follows the same format:

```
[<section-name>, <text>, <optional-subsections>, <optional-subsection>...]
```

Where the optional subsections can be omitted if none exist.

For instance, a very simple manual might look like this:

```
["My Manual",
  "This is some introductory text",
  ["First Section",
    "This is the first section text"],
  ["Second Section",
    "This is the second section text",
    ["Subsection", "This is text for a subsection"],
    ["Another Subsection", "This is text for another subsection"]
  ],
  ["Third Section",
    "This is the third section text"]
]
```

Each of the sections will be automatically numbered and inserted in turn with
the `render_manual` directive, with a table of contents inserted after the
introduction text.  The sections can be regular HTML and will be inserted
after sections headers.  Each of the sections will be parsed, so any Loki
directives can be used; in particular, the `manual_ref` directive can be used to
make relative links to other sections.  References to other sections are made by
name, and must include the entire hierarchy separated by pipes (`|`), i.e., the
first subsection above would be referred to as so:

```
manual_ref('Second Section|Subsection')
```

If the section doesn't exist, it will raise an error.  Note that section `1`
will always be referred to as `Introduction` in the table of contents and should
be referred to the same way by `manual_ref`; the first header will be the manual
name as supplied to `manual_data`, however.

## Blog Pages

There are two parts to setting up a blog: global configuration and entries.  The
global configuration is handled in the `config.rb` (see Config Hooks above) by
using `blog_config`.  The other part is a by having files (similar to views) for
individual entries.

All of the same page metadata parameters (except `manual_data`) can (or should)
be configured either in the `blog_config` block, or in the individual entries.
`template`, `css`, `javascript`, `favicon`, and `head` can be set in
`blog_config` block.  In addition to those, the following parameters can also
found there:

* `main_title`: the main title of the blog; this will be used for the main blog
  pages, i.e., the blog entry list pages.

* `main_template`: the template used for the main blog pages, as above (and also
  for generated pages for tags, see `tag_pages` below).

* `entry_template`: the template used for the blog entries.

* `directory`: source directory where blog entries are found.  This is required;
  I may eventually add support for multiple blog_config blocks with distinct
  directories, but haven't bothered yet.  Note that filenames will be used for
  the blog entry URLs, so should only use valid HTTP URL characters.

* `tag_pages`: build static tag pages.  These can get out of control if you use
  a lot of tags since they aren't dynamically generated by a db backend like a
  normal (i.e., a real) blog server might do, so it's possibly you might want to
  shut them off (and `false` is the default).  If they aren't generated, though,
  then tags on pages won't link to anything.  The tag pages will include static
  pages (i.e., regular non-blog-entry pages) with given tags in addition to blog
  entries.

* `generate_rss`: generates an RSS feed that can be linked to with `rss_feed`
  below; defaults to `false`.

* `main_date_format`: the format used for displaying dates on the blog list
  pages.  Defaults to `"%Y-%m-%d %H:%M"`.

* `description`: used for the blog description in RSS.

* `site_link`: main link to your page for RSS (don't use anything else or the
  entry links will be broken.  Also don't use a trailing slash).

* `entries_per_page`: how many entries will appear on your main blog page before
  pagination kicks in.

For example, you might have something like this in `config.rb`:

```
blog_config do
  main_title "my blog"
  main_template "my.template"
  entry_template "my.template"
  directory "blog_entries"
  css ["my.css"]
end
```

Note that the main blog page will have `blog` as its ID so you can link to it
from other pages.

On each individual entry, the `id` (required), `title`, `tags`, `set`, and
`global` parameters are available (as in normal view metadata), and all should
be found before a `--` separator (as with normal view metadata).  In addition,
the following parameters are available:

* `date` (required): this should be a valid date-time string (anything
  Time.parse can handle is valid, so most reasonable strings should be fine;
  it's up to the blog author to supply something reasonable, however -- do note
  that not supplying a year will cause the entry to be the current year **when
  the blog page is generated by Loki** which may not be what you intended, so
  fully specifying the date is recommended).  We can probably pretend that
  timezones don't exist, though, since dates are being defined on the same
  machine that's generating date links and such, but if that matters to you,
  well, look up Time.parse and give it what it wants.

* `description`: description for RSS; required if generating RSS.

Inside of entries (or the blog template), all of the (non-manual) directives are
available.  In addition, the following are also available:

* `date(<format>)`: returns date for page.  Can be passed optional strftime
  format.

* `date_sidebar`: generates HTML to navigate entries by day/month/year,
  including javascript to expand and collapse periods.  Includes links to
  individual entries.

* `tag_sidebar`: generates lists of tags and counts of pages for each tags;
  includes links if `tag_pages` is true.

* `tag_list`: list of tags for current entry; links if `tag_links` is true.

* `rss_feed(<text>)`: inserts link to RSS feed for blog.  Options are handled
  the same as with other links.

* `next_link`, `previous_link`, `oldest_link`, `newest_link`: links for
  navigating between blog entries.

## Maintainer and License

Douglas Triggs [douglas@triggs.org] is responsible for Loki.  He also likes
inconsistently referring to himself in the third person.

Loki is available under the Apache 2.0 license; don't blame me if it doesn't
work for you, but if you ask nicely I might just help you get it running, who
knows?  Hopefully these instructions are enough to make it pretty painless,
though.

## TODO List

Probably nothing else major at this point, unless I need to implement a new
feature or something.  I might do some random refactoring to clean things up a
bit (in hindsight, having blog entries and pages as separate things might not be
the best idea, for one).  Also, the tests aren't really the greatest.

It's good enough for now, anyway.
